---
layout: post
title:  On Richard Feynmann
date:   2015-03-15 16:40:16
description: One of my favourite scientists
---
Of all the famous scientists out there, my favourite scientist is Richard Feynmann. Although there are many other famous scientists (in particular physicists) that are interesting and inspiring, Richard Feynmann is one that stands out to me due to his charisma, and public life. Many of the things that he has said regarding science are things that I strongly agree with.

For example, in a talk that he gave, "The Value of Science", he mentions three main values that science has to humans. The first two are the obvious ones: science is useful in the technologies that it gives us, and in the enjoyment that we get as we explore the mysteries of the universe, and how it inspires us to continue.

The third value that he mentions is the value of how science always deals with ignorance, doubt, and uncertainty, and how this experience is of great importance to humans. He goes on to say:

Now, we scientists… take it for granted that it is perfectly consistent to be unsure, that it is possible to live and not know. But I don’t know whether everyone realizes this is true. Our freedom to doubt was born out of a struggle against authority in the early days of science. It was a very deep and strong struggle: permitting us to question – to doubt – to not be sure. I think that it is important that we do not forget this struggle and thus perhaps lose what we have gained. Herein lies a responsibility to society.

This I think is a very deep and profound value that science has for us that many do not realize, and is not taught directly to us in school.

In his autobiography, "Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!", he devotes an entire chapter to the topic of "scientific integrity". Scientific integrity, he says, is the idea of doing science in an unbiased way. Unfortunately, this is not something that is taught directly in school; students are expected to just pick it up on their own along the way.

When a scientific experiment is being done, the scientist must make every effort to report all results, and come up with all possible explanations for these results, regardless of whether or not the explanation agrees with the original hypothesis. Unfortunately, this is not always the case. Often, there will be a bias to look for results that support or agree with the original hypothesis, and ignoring results that go against that.

A historical example of this happening was the measurement of the electric charge. Originally when it was measured by Millikan in his oil drop experiment, it was a bit too low, due to error in his value of atmospheric pressure. When later scientists tried measuring the electric charge, they kept on getting values that were just a little higher than Millikan's, until eventually the value stabilized at the current accepted value.

Instead of jumping immediately to the current accepted value, there was a gradual increase in the value. This happened because later scientists were not really trying to independently measure electric charge, but rather were trying to come up with the same value as Millikan. As a result, whenever a high value was measured, they would always find ways to make it lower than it actually was.

In school (in my experience), when experiments are being done for a class, students will look specifically for results that agree with what they expect (experiments at this level are usually well-known and tabulated). Although to be fair, as students are usually under a lot of pressure from deadlines, many miss the point of scientific integrity. They won't do the work of thinking through the experiment, finding all errors in their experiment. Many will even make up results that agree with what they expect, or even ignore results that go against that, if their experimental procedure did not go well. This goes against scientific integrity.

In courses like Big Questions, I appreciate that the content is at a level that allows for students to actually enjoy the material, as opposed to worrying about what kind of mark they might get in the course. The vary nature of the course is such that students are questioning the big questions in science, questions that centuries ago were forbidden from being asked (how did the Universe begin, are we at the center of the Universe, where did we all come from, etc). For this reason, I enjoy this course a lot, and wish it was offered as an option for first year students (maybe even mandatory).
